# Effects of pandemic response measures on crime counts in English and Welsh local authorities
This repository contains the code for the paper, "Effects of pandemic response measures on crime counts in English and Welsh local authorities". 

# Overview 
This paper delves into the changes in crime trends in England and Wales from 2015 to 2023. Our aim was to explore how the stringency index and the pandemic affected different crime types across various regions in England and Wales. We utilized the Bayesian spatiotemporal model to discern the effects of the stringency index on crime. For accounting for spatial and temporal dependencies, the Conditional Auto-regressive (CAR) model was implemented using INLA in R.

**Authors:** Niloufar Pourshir Sefidi, Amin Shoari Nejad, Peter Mooney

## Repository Structure

### 1) DATA:
This folder contains the datasets used for this study. Some datasets are sizeable and thus have not been included directly due to GitHub's size constraints. However, links for downloading these datasets have been provided:

#### Crime Data:
Raw historical street crime data from the UK can be retrieved from the UK POLICE archive from the below link. This dataset is not included in the repository because it exceeds GitHub's size limit. However, a summarized and final version is included under the name `la_street_data_all.parquet`.
https://data.police.uk/data/archive/[year]-[month].zip

#### LSOA to LA Code Converter Data:
A table containing the LSOA codes in the UK and their corresponding LA codes is available in the `lasoa_la_uk.csv` file.


#### Stringency Index Data:
This dataset contains the stringency index values specifically for the 'United Kingdom'. [Download the dataset here](https://ourworldindata.org/explorers/coronavirus-data-explorer?uniformYAxis=0&country=~GBR&hideControls=true&Interval=7-day+rolling+average&Relative+to+Population=true&Color+by+test+positivity=false&Metric=Stringency+index).
This data is also available in the repo under the name `owid-covid-data.csv`.

#### UK Local Authorities Boundaries Shapefile:
The shapefile detailing the boundaries of local authorities in the UK can be found [here](https://geoportal.statistics.gov.uk/datasets/196d1a072aaa4882a50be333679d4f63/explore?location=32.483421%2C-48.094640%2C3.86).

### 2) CODE:
This section comprises the codebase employed for preprocessing, analysis, and visualization.

- **attaching_crime_data.ipynb**:
When downloading crime data from the UK police website, it is organized in folders by year and month. Each folder contains CSV files containing crime data reported by each police force. Each CSV file includes information about the crime type, location (longitude, latitude, LSOA code, and LSOA name), date, and the outcome category of the crime.
Our goal is to combine all these CSV files into a single dataset, focusing only on the columns for crime type, location, and date. After merging the data, we attach the corresponding Local Authority (LA) code to each LSOA code from the crime data, since the original data provided by UK police has LSOA resolution while our study uses LA resolution. Then, the number of crimes was calculated for each unique combination of LA code, crime type, and date.
All these data manipulations are carried out in the `attaching_crime_data.ipynb` script, and the output generated by this script is saved as `la_street_data_all.parquet` in the data folder of this repository.
  
- **data_preparation_excluding_manchester.R**:
Due to the unavailability of data for Greater Manchester Police after July 2019, we had to exclude this area from our study. This R script contains the code for removing the Manchester data from the `la_street_data_all.parquet` dataset. The final crime dataset is now saved as `la_street_without_manchester.rds` in the data folder of this repository.


- **heatmap_timeseries_stringency_viz.R**: Contains the code to create a time series plot showcasing the stringency index for the UK, spanning 2020 to 2022. It also provides visualizations in the form of heatmaps and time series for different crime types mentioned in the paper.


## Contact

If you have any questions or need further assistance, please contact the corresponding author, Pourshir Sefidi, at niloufar.pourshirsefidi.2022@mumail.ie
